---
title: "Davidson: Truth & Meaning"
categories: [reading]
---

### Truth and Meaning

- We agree that a theory of meaning must talk about how the meaning of a
  sentence is constructed from the meanings of words.

- But what form should such a theory take?

- First, what is the meaning of part of a sentence? Can't have everything refer
  to an entity---what does "the father of" refer to? [Model theory says: a
  set.]

- OK, but more generally we don't need to think of complex sets relations or
  relations like $\lambda x. father(x, Annette) \land brother(x, Pierre)$ as
  "referring" to anything---the functional form is enough. (And no additional
  explanatory value in trying to compute its extension.)

- "It behooves us then to rephrase our demand on a satisfactory theory of
  meaning so as not to suggest that individual words must have meanings at all."
  [They don't need to have _referents_, but they still need some kind of local
  information content that allows them to have a "systematic effect on the
  meanings of the sentences in which they occur". Is this not itself meaning?]

- In Frege-land, all our theory needs to be able to do is generate all
  statements of the form: _t_ refers to _x_, where _t_ is a composed expression
  and _x_ is a referent.  [By "all statements" I think we mean $\forall \{t: t is
  well-formed\}$, not $\forall x$.] And now only for sentences, and nothing
  smaller.

- Problem: if the referent of a sentence is its truth value, all true sentences
  are the same. So we still need to rely on the structure of sentences to make
  equality judgments. [???]

- In particular, if I just say that the meaning of "Theaetetus" is
  [[Theaetatus]] and the meaning of "flies" is $\lambda x. f(x)$ for whatever
  $f$ is necessary to assign the right truth value to "Theaetetus flies", I
  haven't explained anything about meaning.

- Worrying about meanings in the lexicon doesn't necessarily tell us anything
  about sentence meaning.

- Syntax comes with a clear decision problem: distinguish between well-formed
  and malformed sentences. Is there a corresponding test for semantics? [What's
  wrong with "correctly predicting human judgments of truth or falsehood?]

- If we say that the meaning of each part is _defined_ by whatever behavior it
  needs to take on to generate meanings for all sentences---that is, if sentence
  meanings are primitive and word meanings derived from these---we're holists.

- One solution this suggests is simply to say that our theory should generate
  sentences of the form "_s_ means that _p_". But this is no good: _p_ is itself
  a sentence, not a meaning. And understanding what "means that" does is the
  same as the original problem we set out to solve.

- So let's instead make the theory generate sentences of the form "_s_ is _T_
  iff _p_". Here _s_ is drawn from the object language and _p_ from a
  metalanguage, but there's nothing preventing us from assuming that the
  metalanguage contains the object language. [More radically, vice-versa!]

- (*) [What problem have we solved here? We originally said we wanted a theory of
  the form "_s_ means _m_", where _m_ is a singular object containing the
  "meaning" of _s_. L must have stronger conditions in mind; so far this would
  let us take any arbitrary correspondence between the object language and the
  space of meanings to be a "theory of meaning". We do not need (or necessarily
  want) a theory of meaning for entities smaller than sentences. We can make the
  proposal _s_ means _m_ less trivial if _m_ lives in a space with more
  structure. If we take it to be the same space as _s_ we're begging the
  question. So instead we let our theory be generated by some predicate _T_.
  To be precise about what is being predicated, _T_ is a function of _s_ (and
  implicitly the model); its conditions are indexed by _p_ (itself implicitly
  a function of the model). Now we have nontrivial structure (provided by the
  structure of the metalanguage), but also nontrivial interpretation (since
  everything lives in space of truth conditions).]

---

- Now we can talk about compositionality: compositionality explains how truth
  conditions are built up from parts.

- And we can evaluate a concrete implementation of a theory by actually looking
  at truth conditions.

- "in cases where we are unsure of the truth of a sentence, we can have
  confidence in a characterization of the truth predicate only if it pairs that
  sentence with one we have good reason to believe equivalent"---a sneaky way
  of making this about listener belief (though it doesn't solve the property
  with tautologies).

- "Omniscience can obviously afford more bizarre theories of meaning than
  ignorance; but then, omniscience has less need of communication." (312) [YES!]

- It will be difficult to come up with a unique theory of meaning for a language
  that we don't speak by interacting with the speaker (q.v. Quine on
  translation).

- Also, we're prevented from actually doing formal verification of a
  truth-conditional theory of meaning because (1) language admits Russell's
  paradoxes and (2) language is complicated and ambiguous in a way that resists
  formalization.

- No satisfactory answer to (1), but for (2) we'll be comfortable starting with
  a formalizable fragment of English and gradually work our way outward.

- And ambiguity is not actually a problem as long as it is representable in the
  metalanguage.

---

- But we still haven't solved the problem with "believes that".

- And we don't even have a compositional analysis of "Bardot is a good
  actress"---what is _good_?

- [The first problem comes from our insistence that we should be able to replace
  any fragment of a sentence with another sentence that means the same thing.
  But the second is a real problem.]

- Also deixis---we can treat demonstratives as constants, but now we have to put
  the speaker's circumstances into th edefinition of our truth function. [How
  could we possibly hope to do otherwise?]

- Formally, take truth to be a relation between a sentence, a person, and a
  time. [So close: "a sentence and a belief about the state of the world"]

---

I think the bullets labeled (*) above contain the substance of my understanding
of this paper, and for motivating truth conditions as the kind of structured
representation that deserves to be called the meaning of a sentence. It's an
important observation that many apparent paradoxes in truth-conditional accounts
of meaning are sensitive to the information available to the implementer of the
truth predicate---but he doesn't seem to quite get to linking this claim to his
claim that _T_ needs to be indexed by speaker states. And we still haven't said
anything about compositionality....
