---
title: "PI notes"
categories: [reading]
---

- Augustine's language: reference comes first. Language understanding is
  $p(x|w)$.

- Shopkeeper/builder's language: behavior comes first. Language understanding is
  $p(a|w,x)$.

- Latter subsumes former. To behave correctly, must be able to pay
  attention to the right things in response to given words; this is reference.
  [But is compositionality this easy?]

- "If we say, 'Every word in the language signifies something', we have so far
  said nothing _whatever_; unless we explain exactly _what_ distinction we want
  to make" 

- But we learn how to use language via explicit reference. All
  definitions-by-pointing are necessarily ambiguous, so the learner needs some
  kind of prior knowledge to interpret them successfully.

- In particular, we can attach a name to a concept only after we have already
  formulated the concept.

- Various examples of descriptions with no referent [in this world]

- "For a _large_ class of cases of the employment of the word meaning -- though
  not for _all_ -- this word can be explained in this way: the meaning of a word
  is its use in the language." (43)

- Definitions cannot specify wholes in terms of parts: there is not canonical
  decomposition or minimal set of primitives.

- Discussion of the fact that we mean something different by _is_ in _this board
  is one meter long_ vs _the standard rod in Paris is one meter long_. The
  second is about naming; "Naming is not yet a move in a language-game". [But
  the language we use in the "real" language game isn't static. To the effect
  that I can influence subsequent use in the middle of a language game by
  declaring that _this apple is<sub>naming</sub> blue_, is there any meaningful
  distinction between the two cases?

- Some other ways in which we might ascribe meaning to words: because they
  imagine particular things upon using / hearing the words; because they're
  taught in a particular way; because a particular standard (grounded) lexicon
  exists.

- Ditto for higher-order rules involving language use.

- But what is actually denoted? Not concrete objects: "it must be possible to
  describe the state of affairs in which everything destructible is destroyed"
  (55). Rather some kind of mental phenomenon. But suppose a population of
  speakers moves somewhere where nothing is red, and forgets what red looks
  like. Is it still meaningful to speak of [[red]] as corresponding to anything
  at all?

- Tedious discussion of the fact that "game" doesn't have an easy definition to
  pin down. Prototype + exemplars -> "family resemblance".

- But because these boundaries are not sharply defined, it's likely that any
  given pair of speakers will disagree about boundary cases.

- Even things that look like rigid designators are fuzzy in this way.

- Language is not a noisy approximation of an idealized logical language. 

- "A philosophical problem has the form: 'I don't know my way about'" (123).
  "It is not the business of philosophy to resolve a contradiction by means of a
  mathematical or logico-mathematical discovery, but to render surveyable the
  state of mathematics that troubles us -- the state of affairs _before_ the
  contradiction is resolved" (125).

- But also, logic is not a noisy approximation of language: just a source of
  analogies.

- (How can we speak precisely about mathematical objects and other things of
  philosophical interest, when all we have to use is language when talking about
  them?)

- What's primitive in language use is a black box that generates correctness
  judgments. ("X is a proposition", "K comes after L", "In the world described
  by that sentence, it is John who loves Mary".)

(138)
